---
warning-start: DO NOT EDIT THIS SECTION
layout: project
call: 3
title: Projects
excerpt: We're supporting some fantastic digital participation projects. Here are their stories.
project-title: Southside Connections
project-excerpt:
project-lead: Southside Housing Association
website: http://www.southside-ha.org/
email: pfletcher@southside-ha.co.uk
twitter-url:
facebook-url:
start: 16th November 2015
end: 15th November 2016
award: 10000
postcode: G51 4EB
image: /images/projects/shlogoonly.jpg
tags: older-people benefits ethnic-minority
permalink: /projects/southsideha/
submenu: participation-projects
fa-icon: fa-file-o
warning-end: DO NOT EDIT ABOVE THIS LINE
---

### Project description

This is a partnership bid with Glasgow Life/Glasgow Libraries, Glasgow Homelessness Network, Nan McKay Memorial Hall, Govan and Craigton Integration Network and Glasgow Clyde College. Southside Housing Association is the lead partner. The project will take place within the Pollokshields and Cardonald/Craigton areas of Glasgow. The project broadly aims to support people currently not digitally engaged but who would benefit greatly.

Key elements of the project include:

* Installation of wi-fi and IT equipment within 4 community bases; providing local, safe and welcoming environments for learning. The bases are community flats (or resident lounge within sheltered housing complexes) converted into common space for local people to come together and participate in positive activities. Current activities include easy exercise, story telling, arts, and healthy cooking. By providing wi-fi and IT equipment we will be able to extend these activities to include digital learning. It should be noted that we have 3 other community bases with wi-fi, and we work in close partnership with the Nan McKay Memorial Hall as a welcoming base for learning. These spaces will be used within the project, however in order to reach the target groups outlined above, and a greater number of individuals, this project requires additional support in the form of further wi-fi installation, IT equipment and in-kind support from partners.

* Delivery of a range of courses (by Glasgow Clyde College) within each community base covering the [basic digital skills](http://digital.scvo.org.uk/participation/basic-digital-skills/). By doing so we hope to provide people with the skills to improve their ability to connect with others, save money on-line, enquire and apply for benefits, carry out research and work together to improve, develop and connect within their local areas. We also envisage that by providing wi-fi people may choose to bring their own IT equipment to the bases at a time that suits them (outwith the structured learning/activity times).
We have completed the delivery of 3 courses, 2 in our Sheltered Housing bases in Pollokshields and one within our Berryknowes Base in Cardonald.  7 people attended each programme, all 21 attendees were taught the basics in using tablets, setting up thier own email accounts, send and recieve emails and searching online.  Some participants brought thier own laptops or tablets and used thier own equipment to build thier confindence and existing skills.  We will be running another 2 courses ove rthe summer.
In August so envisage that by providing wi-fi people may choose to bring their own IT equipment to the bases at a time that suits them (outwith the structured learning/activity times).We have completed the delivery of 3 courses, 2 in our Sheltered Housing bases in Pollokshields and one within our Berryknowes Base in Cardonald.  7 people attended each programme, all 21 attendees were taught the basics in using tablets, setting up thier own email accounts, send and recieve emails and searching online.  Some participants brought thier own laptops or tablets and used thier own equipment to build thier confindence and existing skills.  We will be running another 2 courses ove rthe summer.


* Ensuring that people are not simply offered the opportunity of participating in digital learning and using wi-fi in their own time (within the bases), but that they are encouraged to connect with existing services and organisations, thus using the project as a foundation for creating pathways to these services and therefore greater outcomes for participants. These other services are currently offered within local libraries, Glasgow Clyde College, the Nan McKay Memorial Hall, Glasgow Homelessness Network and the Govan and Craigton Integration Network. We recognise the importance of ensuring people know what other support exists, which is why this project will be delivered in partnership.
Each course incorporated a workshop delivered by Glasgow Libraries where all attendees were informed of the various services the library has to offer.  All attendees were given the opportunity to referr themselves to the Glasgow Libraries IT workshops to continue thier learning and utilise other services relevant to theier needs.  Southside Hosuing Association (SHA) also purchased and dontated IT equipment to other local services.  We dontated a Smart Board to the Glasgow and Craigton Integration Network (GCIN) to support them in delivering a series of Esol and IT workshops.  We also donated a number of Tablets to he Nan Makcay Hall to support them in delivering a similar series of Digital learning workshops.
By delivering this project we hope to address some of the barriers people find to going online. Some of which include ‘it’s too difficult to learn’; ‘it’s too expensive’; ‘worrying about privacy/viruses; ‘no connection/computer’ (CarnegieUK Trust, 2013. Across the Divide –Tackling Digital Exclusion in Glasgow).
Prioir to running these courses, Southside Housing Association coordinated a series of consultation meetings within each base and also distributed a feedback questionnaire to all tenants living local to our bases.  The consultations and finiding of the questionnaire revealed that a significantly high number of tenants were keen to take part in Digital Learning course but felt they were "too old now" or "its too hard to learn that stuff".  WE also found that many tenants did not have the finances to install wifi in thier homes and purchase equipment of thier own.  THe local bases provide a safe and free space to learn and break down some of these barriers.  At the beginning of each course we asked attendees to complete a Digityal inclusion questionnare, this captured thier current skill level and attitudes.  We also asked all attendees to complete the questionnaire after the course had completed.  We found that all attendees had learned a new skill and most were farily confident in sending and recieveing emails on their own.  We observed a change in attitude, particualry amongst older participants who previousy believed they were too old to particiapte.  It is good to note that 6 of our older participants now attend the library once a week, use the computer thier and also utilise other services the libaray has to offer.
We have just completed and 8 week Keys to Learn programme, deliverd in partnership with Glasgow Homlessness Network (GHN) and  City of GLasgow College.  The programme works with people at risk of losing thier tenancies due to debt, mental health issues, drugs, alcohol etc.  The Keys to Learn programme introduces participants to different skills and pathways that could resolve or alleviate such issues.  The programme includes cooking on a budget, learning digital skills, budgeting and debt management, managing stress etc.  Part of the programmes is also to introduce participants to services offer by SHA and within the lcoal community.  For example, particiapnts took part in a session with SHA's Welfare Rights department and were presented with knowledge and information relevant to thier needs, they were also offered individual appointments for additional support needed, in the same way, particpants completed a session with the Epic 360 service which offer suppport to people living in Glasgow with budgeting and debt managmement.  Participants have been encouraged to use their local community bases at meeting spaces for such services and to conintue accessing the internet.  
### Planned project milestones

* Installation of Wi-Fi within 4 community bases: December 2015
Wifi has been installed in all 8 of ou community bases.  All tenants and members of the local community are encourages to use the space to continue thier learning and take part in all the other servies ans activities the bases have to offer.
* IT equipment purchased and ready for use. This will include: tablets, keyboards for tablets, mice, tablet covers, smart screen, memory sticks and adapters, laptops, paper and printer): December 2015
We purchased 26 tablets for Southside Housing Association to use within our course delivery, 1 Smart Board and 5 Chrome Books for Glasgow and Craigton Integration Networkk and 10 tablets for the Nan Mackay Hall.
* A range of learning programmes for communities developed in partnership with Glasgow Clyde College and Glasgow Life (library services), Nan McKay Memorial Hall, Glasgow Homelessness Network and Govan and Craigton Integration Network: January 2015

* 14 Learning programmes promoted and delivered to communities: October 2016
Currently Southside Housing Association have delivered 3 digital Inclusion Programmes.  The Glasgoe and Craigton Integration Network deliver 6 Esol courses and 2 weekly Homework Clubs for younger children using the Smart Board.  Nan Mackay deliver 2 Digital Inclusion classes per week.  SHA will run 2 more courses over the summer, THe ESOl calsses run by GCIN and Digital Classes run by Nan Mackay are continous programme of learning.
In August 2016 SHA delivered 2, 8 week Digital Inclusion courses for tenants and members of the local community as intended.  The courses were delivered for those at beginners level and taught how to set up, send and recieve emails, searh online and send attachements.  Prior to the course we held two informaiton days where potential particaitpants were potential participants digital skill level was assesed.  Though who were classes as complete beginners were placed on the course deivered by SHA and those with a higher skill level were referred to thier local Librabry and given information on the various courses delivered.  A total of 20 people attended the classes. Since August and to date, GCIN have reportedly delivered Esol classes, Homework Club classes, Womens Groups and Mens Groups to an average of 250 people through he use of thier Smartscreen and tablets.  The Nan Mackay Hall have delivered a sereies of didgital inclusion programmes in partnership with City oF GLasgow College, Clyde College North and suported an average of 53 people to learn basic digital skills and furhter develop existing skills fo rmore advanced users.  
We are curretnly delivering another 8 week Digital Learning Programme to our Sheltered Housing residents.  The programme is teaching residents (at beginners level) to send and recieve emails, shop and search safely online, keep in touch with friends and family and much more.  
* Community bases utilised informally/ad-hoc by local people: October 2016
All our community bases are used by tenants and members of the local community, 5 Coffee afternoons and one Arts and Crafts workshop, one Knitting Club, throughout our bases, are self run by participants.  local residents are also offered the space for personal use, such as parties,lage gathering wiht friends and family.
SHA now has a total of 8 Community Bases, each delivers a schedule of activities and events tailored to local expressed needs and preferences.  We are currenty running a series of Cultural Cooking Prgrammes in Pollokshields where local people can come together, share recipes, cook them and work with Impact Arts to create a Cook Book. We also deliver Chair Based Movement and Falls Prevention classes out of each base for older tenants and older members of the community. It is important to note, participants of each hub arrange activites for thier groups outwith the shedule.  Most recently, the participants of the Berryknowes Community flat arranged a Burns Dinner, all participants cooked together and invited other neightbours to join in.  Simialr to this, at our Hartlaw and Chirnside Community Flat, particpants self-run a weekly arts group.      
### Planned outputs and outcomes

* Participants are more equipped, confident and able to use their digital skills to carry out and manage day-to-day activities (e.g. on-line shopping, in touch with family, on-line forums/support, resolving benefit/welfare issues).
Following on from the Digital Inclusion programme, we are now encouraging residents to contact staff via email as well as by telephone.  We also encourage residents to bring thier IT equipment to the bases to utilise the wifi space.
As part of our working practice, we contact tenants via email, where appropriate and where the tenants is confident in communticating in this manner. We launched SHA's Face Book Page in the summer of 2016 and since this time, we have been uploading all Community Initiaitves information onto Face Book and encouraging tenants to stay informed on local events and activities using this method.   Over the last 6 months there has been a significant increase in the number of resesidents and community members contacting Community Initiatives staff via Emails and Face Book messages.  
* Participants have improved skills and abilities, and increased knowledge and understanding of how to improve their employment and financial opportunities through IT and internet sources.
Each Digital Inclusion Programme delierved by Southside Housing Association

* Participants have an increased awareness of and connectedness to existing community services and resources.
As part of our working practice, SHA promotes all relevant services and events to particiapnts within a particualr programme as a means to ecnourage people to connect with their local bases and access pathways to local services.  Our volunteers have assited participants to make referrals to Welfare Rights services, Citizens Advice, seek suport and guidance from thier local Community Forums.  
SHA has a dedicated team of 4 active volunteers who assit local people and residents to access services that meet thier needs, more recently, our volunteers have worked closely with Glasgoe Homelessness Network and City of Glasgow College to deliver a Keys to Learn Programme which support people at risk of losing thier tenancie due to debt, mental health issues, drugs ro alochol etc.  The Volunteers are assisiting the Keys to Learn particiapnts to learn basic digital skills, assitng them to look for employment or voluntary work, writting up CV's etc.  

* Participants are more connected to others in their community, and are motivated to work together to improve their local area/community, using IT/digital methods as a means to supporting this process.
4 participants of the most recent series of Digital Inclusion courses have been suported by SHA and the Scottish Seniors Alliance to set up a Seniors Forum in the Cardonald and Graigton area. Each of these particiapnts is now an elected Office Bearer for the Forum that used their It skills to fullfill their individual roles.  Although ealy days and person has much to learn, all 4 particiaptns have advised SHA that completing the Digital Inclusion course has given them the confidence to get involved in ther community in this way and are confident in utilising thier It skills to support the process of managing and running he Forum.  Currently, the Forum has 43 members who work togethter to raise issues and improve thier local community.  
### Evaluation
We held a review meetings after the inital 3 courses and were pleased with the results we had achieved.  We were also please with the extent to which we supported other agencies to engage people digitally.  We hoped to engage a high number of participants and agreed to actively promote the next two course on a wider level, reaching out to local community centres, the local church and promting the coursed via more local services.At the end of the programme, a review meeting was held at each community
hub where afternoon tea was provided for all the participants.   Participant’s experience of the week was
discussed and we encouraged feedback on the ways in which participants would
like to see the programme develop further. 
After the intial 3 course were completed, we held a review meeting with all stakeholders involved to evaluate our delivery and make reccommendations for the next two classes.  We agreed that we would incorporate and induction session prioir to the next two courses, the people who were beginners would be placed on the Digital Inclusion programme deliverd by SHA and those who had a basic skill level would be referred to Glasgow Libraies.  We all agreed this format as we found that the original 3 courses were somewhat disjointed due to the various skill levels of participants.  Some particiapnts, with no skill level required one one one learning and others needed less support.  Thus, we agreed that we would group the skill levels together.
Similar to the inital review process.  Review meeting were held with participants and stakeholders to evualte our progress and make reccomendations for future programmes.  It was agreed that induction sessions proved to be extremely helpful to the delivery of the sessions and we could continue to work in this manner.  It was also agreed that SHA would implement a drop-in service for those who had basic skill levels but need a little one on one support with a minor task.  SHA aslso intend to pilot these drop-in sesssions as a Job Club for those who need some assistance with or simply need the resources to look for employment online.

### Lessons learned
Having delivered a number of Digital Learning programmes there are a few issues that the Community Initiaitves Team have identifie that would help SHA to, capture the most appropriate audience, deliver the programmes more effectively and engage with a wider group of people.
Before and after each programme SHA asked participants to complete a pre and post evaluation questionnaire.  The feedback we recieved from the questionnaires, our volunteers and through observation have highlighted:  depending on age group, certain participants prefer a "class room" type structured learning style, whilst others prefer a more relaxed gathering.  Our feedback tells us that older participants prefer the latter and this understanding has been used and applied when we have delivered programmes within the sheltered housing and other areas with an older demographic.
We also gathered, of those programmes delivered, particpants prefered learning in facilities with Smart Screens or TV's with Casting ability.  Participants prefered folowing instructions from the facilittor by watching a larger screen and they reported that it was easier for them to follow and keep up with the pace.  We will and have been delivering programmes from those bases that have this facility over other facilities, where appropriate.
Other lessons learned are: not all particpants want or need an 8 week programme of learning.  Some, more able participants have come into sessions to have minor IT issues resolved.  For example, to learn how to attach or upload photos or CV's onto an email.  We observed this from many of our participants who attended a couple of sessions then did not return.  As a result of this, we are now considereing piloting a Drop In service or a Job Club to meet this need.
